pdf version of the entry
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2021/entries/berkeley/
from the Fall 2021 Edition of the
Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy
Edward N. Zalta Uri Nodelman Colin Allen R. Lanier Anderson
Principal Editor Senior Editor Associate Editor Faculty Sponsor
Editorial Board
https://plato.stanford.edu/board.html
Library of Congress Catalog Data
ISSN: 1095-5054
Notice : This PDF version was distributed by request to mem-
bers of the Friends of the SEP Society and by courtesy to SEP
content contributors. It is solely for their fair use. Unauthorized
distribution is prohibited. To learn how to join the Friends of the
SEP Society and obtain authorized PDF versions of SEP entries,
please visit https://leibniz.stanford.edu/friends/ .
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Copyright c/circlecopyrt2021 by the publisher
The Metaphysics Research Lab
Center for the Study of Language and Information
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
Copyright c/circlecopyrt2021 by the author
Lisa Downing
All rights reserved.
Copyright policy: https://leibniz.stanford.edu/friends/info/copyright/
George BerkeleyFirst published Fri Sep 10, 2004; substantive revision Wed Jan 19, 2011George Berkeley, Bishop of Cloyne, was one of the great philosophers ofthe early modern period. He was a brilliant critic of his predecessors,particularly Descartes, Malebranche, and Locke. He was a talentedmetaphysician famous for defending idealism, that is, the view that realityconsists exclusively of minds and their ideas. Berkeley’s system, while itstrikes many as counter-intuitive, is strong and ﬂexible enough to countermost objections. His most-studied works, the Treatise Concerning thePrinciples of Human Knowledge (Principles, for short) and ThreeDialogues between Hylas and Philonous (Dialogues), are beautifullywritten and dense with the sort of arguments that delight contemporaryphilosophers. He was also a wide-ranging thinker with interests in religion(which were fundamental to his philosophical motivations), thepsychology of vision, mathematics, physics, morals, economics, andmedicine. Although many of Berkeley’s ﬁrst readers greeted him withincomprehension, he inﬂuenced both Hume and Kant, and is much read (iflittle followed) in our own day.1. Life and philosophical works2. Berkeley’s critique of materialism in the Principles and Dialogues2.1 The attack on representationalist materialism2.1.1 The core argument2.1.2 The likeness principle2.1.3 Anti-abstractionism2.1.4 What does materialism explain?2.2 Contra direct realist materialism2.2.1 The master argument?2.2.2 The First Dialogue and relativity arguments3. Berkeley’s positive program: idealism and common sense1
3.1 The basics of Berkeley’s ontology3.1.1 The status of ordinary objects3.1.2 Spirits as active substances3.1.3 God’s existence3.2 Replies to objections3.2.1 Real things vs. imaginary ones3.2.2 Hidden structures and internal mechanisms3.2.3 Scientiﬁc explanation3.2.4 Unperceived objects—Principles vs. Dialogues3.2.5 The possibility of error3.2.6 Spirits and causation4. Other philosophically important works [Not yet available]4.1 Berkeley’s works on vision4.2 De Motu and Berkeley’s Newtonianism4.3 Alciphron4.4 SirisBibliographyAcademic ToolsOther Internet ResourcesRelated Entries1. Life and philosophical worksBerkeley was born in 1685 near Kilkenny, Ireland. After several years ofschooling at Kilkenny College, he entered Trinity College, in Dublin, atage 15. He was made a fellow of Trinity College in 1707 (three years aftergraduating) and was ordained in the Anglican Church shortly thereafter.At Trinity, where the curriculum was notably modern, Berkeleyencountered the new science and philosophy of the late seventeenthcentury, which was characterized by hostility towards Aristotelianism.Berkeley’s philosophical notebooks (sometimes styled the PhilosophicalGeorge Berkeley
2 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Commentaries), which he began in 1707, provide rich documentation ofBerkeley’s early philosophical evolution, enabling the reader to track theemergence of his immaterialist philosophy from a critical response toDescartes, Locke, Malebranche, Newton, Hobbes, and others.Berkeley’s ﬁrst important published work, An Essay Towards a NewTheory of Vision (1709), was an inﬂuential contribution to the psychologyof vision and also developed doctrines relevant to his idealist project. Inhis mid-twenties, he published his most enduring works, the Treatiseconcerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) and the ThreeDialogues between Hylas and Philonous (1713), whose central doctrineswe will examine below.In 1720, while completing a four-year tour of Europe as tutor to a youngman, Berkeley composed De Motu, a tract on the philosophicalfoundations of mechanics which developed his views on philosophy ofscience and articulated an instrumentalist approach to Newtoniandynamics. After his continental tour, Berkeley returned to Ireland andresumed his position at Trinity until 1724, when he was appointed Dean ofDerry. At this time, Berkeley began developing his scheme for founding acollege in Bermuda. He was convinced that Europe was in spiritual decayand that the New World offered hope for a new golden age. Havingsecured a charter and promises of funding from the British Parliament,Berkeley set sail for America in 1728, with his new bride, Anne Forster.They spent three years in Newport, Rhode Island, awaiting the promisedmoney, but Berkeley’s political support had collapsed and they wereforced to abandon the project and return to Britain in 1731. While inAmerica, Berkeley composed Alciphron, a work of Christian apologeticsdirected against the “free-thinkers” whom he took to be enemies ofestablished Anglicanism. Alciphron is also a signiﬁcant philosophicalwork and a crucial source of Berkeley’s views on language.Lisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 3
Shortly after returning to London, Berkeley composed the Theory ofVision, Vindicated and Explained, a defense of his earlier work on vision,and the Analyst, an acute and inﬂuential critique of the foundations ofNewton’s calculus. In 1734 he was made Bishop of Cloyne, and thus hereturned to Ireland. It was here that Berkeley wrote his last, strangest, andbest-selling (in his own lifetime) philosophical work. Siris (1744) has athree-fold aim: to establish the virtues of tar-water (a liquid prepared byletting pine tar stand in water) as a medical panacea, to provide scientiﬁcbackground supporting the efﬁcacy of tar-water, and to lead the mind ofthe reader, via gradual steps, toward contemplation of God. Berkeley diedin 1753, shortly after moving to Oxford to supervise the education of hisson George, one of the three out of seven of his children to survivechildhood.2. Berkeley’s critique of materialism in thePrinciples and DialoguesIn his two great works of metaphysics, Berkeley defends idealism byattacking the materialist alternative. What exactly is the doctrine that he’sattacking? Readers should ﬁrst note that “materialism” is here used tomean “the doctrine that material things exist”. This is in contrast withanother use, more standard in contemporary discussions, according towhich materialism is the doctrine that only material things exist. Berkeleycontends that no material things exist, not just that some immaterial thingsexist. Thus, he attacks Cartesian and Lockean dualism, not just theconsiderably less popular (in Berkeley’s time) view, held by Hobbes, thatonly material things exist. But what exactly is a material thing?Interestingly, part of Berkeley’s attack on matter is to argue that thisquestion cannot be satisfactorily answered by the materialists, that theycannot characterize their supposed material things. However, an answerthat captures what exactly it is that Berkeley rejects is that material thingsGeorge Berkeley
4 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
are mind-independent things or substances. And a mind-independent thingis something whose existence is not dependent on thinking/perceivingthings, and thus would exist whether or not any thinking things (minds)existed. Berkeley holds that there are no such mind-independent things,that, in the famous phrase, esse est percipi (aut percipere) — to be is to beperceived (or to perceive).Berkeley charges that materialism promotes skepticism and atheism:skepticism because materialism implies that our senses mislead us as tothe natures of these material things, which moreover need not exist at all,and atheism because a material world could be expected to run without theassistance of God. This double charge provides Berkeley’s motivation forquestioning materialism (one which he thinks should motivate others aswell), though not, of course, a philosophical argument against materialism.Fortunately, the Principles and Dialogues overﬂow with such arguments.Below, we will examine some of the main elements of Berkeley’sargumentative campaign against matter.2.1 The attack on representationalist materialism2.1.1 The core argumentThe starting point of Berkeley’s attack on the materialism of hiscontemporaries is a very short argument presented in Principles 4:It is indeed an opinion strangely prevailing amongst men, thathouses, mountains, rivers, and in a word all sensible objects havean existence natural or real, distinct from their being perceived bythe understanding. But with how great an assurance andacquiescence soever this principle may be entertained in the world;yet whoever shall ﬁnd in his heart to call it in question, may, if Imistake not, perceive it to involve a manifest contradiction. ForLisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 5
Berkeley presents here the following argument (see Winkler 1989, 138):
The argument is valid, and premise (1) looks hard to deny. What aboutpremise (2)? Berkeley believes that this premise is accepted by all themodern philosophers. In the Principles, Berkeley is operating within theidea-theoretic tradition of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Inparticular, Berkeley believes that some version of this premise is acceptedby his main targets, the inﬂuential philosophers Descartes and Locke.However, Berkeley recognizes that these philosophers have an obviousresponse available to this argument. This response blocks Berkeley’sinference to (3) by distinguishing two sorts of perception, mediate andimmediate. Thus, premises (1) and (2) are replaced by the claims that (1ʹ)we mediately perceive ordinary objects, while (2ʹ) we immediatelyperceive only ideas. From these claims, of course, no idealist conclusionfollows. The response reﬂects a representationalist theory of perception,according to which we indirectly (mediately) perceive material things, bydirectly (immediately) perceiving ideas, which are mind-dependent items.The ideas represent external material objects, and thereby allow us toperceive them.what are the forementioned objects but the things we perceive bysense, and what do we perceive besides our own ideas orsensations; and is it not plainly repugnant that any one of these orany combination of them should exist unperceived?(1) We perceive ordinary objects (houses, mountains, etc.).(2) We perceive only ideas.Therefore,(3) Ordinary objects are ideas.George Berkeley
6 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Whether Descartes, Malebranche, and Locke were representationalists ofthis kind is a matter of some controversy (see e.g. Yolton 1984, Chappell1994). However, Berkeley surely had good grounds for understanding hispredecessors in this way: it reﬂects the most obvious interpretation ofLocke’s account of perception and Descartes’ whole procedure in theMeditations tends to suggest this sort of view, given the meditator’ssituation as someone contemplating her own ideas, trying to determinewhether something external corresponds to them.2.1.2 The likeness principleBerkeley devotes the succeeding sections of the Principles to underminingthe representationalist response to his initial argument. In effect, he posesthe question: What allows an idea to represent a material object? Heassumes, again with good grounds, that the representationalist answer isgoing to involve resemblance:
Berkeley argues that this supposed resemblance is nonsensical; an idea canonly be like another idea.But why? The closest Berkeley ever comes to directly addressing thisquestion is in his early philosophical notebooks, where he observes that“Two things cannot be said to be alike or unlike till they have beencompar’d” (PC 377). Thus, because the mind can compare nothing but itsown ideas, which by hypothesis are the only things immediatelyBut say you, though the ideas themselves do not exist without themind, yet there may be things like them whereof they are copies orresemblances, which things exist without the mind, in anunthinking substance. I answer, an idea can be like nothing but anidea; a colour or ﬁgure can be like nothing but another colour orﬁgure. (PHK 8)Lisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 7
perceivable, the representationalist cannot assert a likeness between anidea and a non-ideal mind-independent material object. (For furtherdiscussion, see Winkler 1989, 145–9.)If Berkeley’s Likeness Principle, the thesis that an idea can only be likeanother idea, is granted, representationalist materialism is in serioustrouble. For how are material objects now to be characterized? If materialobjects are supposed to be extended, solid, or colored, Berkeley willcounter that these sensory qualities pertain to ideas, to that which isimmediately perceived, and that the materialist cannot assert that materialobjects are like ideas in these ways. Many passages in the Principles andDialogues drive home this point, arguing that matter is, if not anincoherent notion, at best a completely empty one.2.1.3 Anti-abstractionismOne way in which Berkeley’s anti-abstractionism comes into play is inreinforcing this point. Berkeley argues in the “Introduction” to thePrinciples[1] that we cannot form general ideas in the way that Lockeoften seems to suggest—by stripping particularizing qualities from an ideaof a particular, creating a new, intrinsically general, abstract idea.[2]Berkeley then claims that notions the materialist might invoke in a last-ditch attempt to characterize matter, e.g. being or mere extension, areobjectionably abstract and unavailable.[3]2.1.4 What does materialism explain?Berkeley is aware that the materialist has one important card left to play:Don’t we need material objects in order to explain our ideas? And indeed,this seems intuitively gripping: Surely the best explanation of the fact thatI have a chair idea every time I enter my ofﬁce and that my colleague hasGeorge Berkeley
8 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
a chair idea when she enters my ofﬁce is that a single enduring materialobject causes all these various ideas. Again, however, Berkeley replies byeffectively exploiting the weaknesses of his opponents’ theories:
Firstly, Berkeley contends, a representationalist must admit that we couldhave our ideas without there being any external objects causing them(PHK 18). (This is one way in which Berkeley sees materialism as leadingto skepticism.) More devastatingly, however, he must admit that theexistence of matter does not help to explain the occurrence of our ideas.After all, Locke himself diagnosed the difﬁculty:
And, when Descartes was pressed by Elizabeth as to how mind and bodyinteract,[4] she rightly regarded his answers as unsatisfactory. The basicproblem here is set by dualism: how can one substance causally affect…though we give the materialists their external bodies, they bytheir own confession are never the nearer knowing how our ideasare produced: since they own themselves unable to comprehend inwhat manner body can act upon spirit, or how it is possible itshould imprint any idea in the mind. Hence it is evident theproduction of ideas or sensations in our minds, can be no reasonwhy we should suppose matter or corporeal substances, since thatis acknowledged to remain equally inexplicable with, or withoutthis supposition. (PHK 19)
Body as far as we can conceive being able only to strike and affectbody; and Motion, according to the utmost reach of our Ideas,being able to produce nothing but Motion, so that when we allow itto produce pleasure or pain, or the Idea of a Colour, or Sound, weare fain to quit our Reason, go beyond our Ideas, and attribute itwholly to the good Pleasure of our Maker. (Locke 1975, 541;Essay4.3.6)Lisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 9
another substance of a fundamentally different kind? In its Cartesian form,the difﬁculty is particularly severe: how can an extended thing, whichaffects other extended things only by mechanical impact, affect a mind,which is non-extended and non-spatial?Berkeley’s point is thus well taken. It is worth noting that, in addition toundermining the materialist’s attempted inference to the best explanation,Berkeley’s point also challenges any attempt to explain representation andmediate perception in terms of causation. That is, the materialist might tryto claim that ideas represent material objects, not by resemblance, but invirtue of being caused by the objects. (Though neither Descartes norLocke spells out such an account, there are grounds in each for attributingsuch an account to them. For Descartes see Wilson 1999, 73–76; forLocke see Chappell 1994, 53.) However, PHK 19 implies that thematerialists are not in a position to render this account of representationphilosophically satisfactory.2.2 Contra direct realist materialismAs emphasized above, Berkeley’s campaign against matter, as he presentsit in the Principles, is directed against materialist representationalism andpresupposes representationalism. In particular, Berkeley presupposes thatall anyone ever directly or immediately perceives are ideas. Ascontemporary philosophers, we might wonder whether Berkeley hasanything to say to a materialist who denies this representationalist premiseand asserts instead that we ordinarily directly/immediately perceivematerial objects themselves. The answer is ‘yes’.George Berkeley
10 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
2.2.1 The master argument?However, one place where one might naturally look for such an argumentis not, in fact, as promising as might initially appear. In both the Principles(22–3) and the Dialogues (200), Berkeley gives a version of what hascome to be called “The Master Argument”[5] because of the apparentstrength with which he endorses it:… I am content to put the whole upon this issue; if you can butconceive it possible for one extended moveable substance, or ingeneral, for any one idea or any thing like an idea, to existotherwise than in a mind perceiving it, I shall readily give up thecause…. But say you, surely there is nothing easier than to imaginetrees, for instance, in a park, or books existing in a closet, and nobody by to perceive them. I answer, you may so, there is nodifﬁculty in it: but what is all this, I beseech you, more thanframing in your mind certain ideas which you call books and trees,and at the same time omitting to frame the idea of any one thatmay perceive them? But do not you your self perceive or think ofthem all the while? This therefore is nothing to the purpose: it onlyshows you have the power of imagining or forming ideas in yourmind; but it doth not shew that you can conceive it possible, theobjects of your thought may exist without the mind: to make outthis, it is necessary that you conceive them existing unconceived orunthought of, which is a manifest repugnancy. When we do ourutmost to conceive the existence of external bodies, we are all thewhile only contemplating our own ideas. But the mind taking nonotice of itself, is deluded to think it can and doth conceive bodiesexisting unthought of or without the mind; though at the same timethey are apprehended by or exist in it self. (PHK 22–23)Lisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 11
The argument seems intended to establish that we cannot actuallyconceive of mind-independent objects, that is, objects existingunperceived and unthought of. Why not? Simply because in order toconceive of any such things, we must ourselves be conceiving, i.e.,thinking, of them. However, as Pitcher (1977, 113) nicely observes, suchan argument seems to conﬂate the representation (what we conceive with)and the represented (what we conceive of—the content of our thought).Once we make this distinction, we realize that although we must havesome conception or representation in order to conceive of something, andthat representation is in some sense thought of, it does not follow (contraBerkeley) that what we conceive of must be a thought-of object. That is,when we imagine a tree standing alone in a forest, we (arguably) conceiveof an unthought-of object, though of course we must employ a thought inorder to accomplish this feat.[6] Thus (as many commentators haveobserved), this argument fails.A more charitable reading of the argument (see Winkler 1989, 184–7;Lennon 1988) makes Berkeley’s point that we cannot representunconceivedness, because we have never and could never experience it.[7]Because we cannot represent unconceivedness, we cannot conceive ofmind-independent objects. While this is a rather more promisingargument, it clearly presupposes representationalism, just as Berkeley’searlier Principles arguments did.[8] (This, however, is not necessarily adefect of the interpretation, since the Principles, as we saw above, isaimed against representationalism, and in the Dialogues the MasterArgument crops up only after Hylas has been converted torepresentationalism (see below).)[9]George Berkeley
12 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
2.2.2 The First Dialogue and relativity argumentsThus, if we seek a challenge to direct realist materialism, we must turn tothe Three Dialogues, where the character Hylas (the would-be materialist)begins from a sort of naïve realism, according to which we perceivematerial objects themselves, directly. Against this position, Philonous(lover of spirit—Berkeley’s spokesperson) attempts to argue that thesensible qualities—the qualities immediately perceived by sense—must beideal, rather than belonging to material objects. (The following analysis ofthese ﬁrst dialogue arguments is indebted to Margaret Wilson’s account in“Berkeley on the Mind-Dependence of Colors,” Wilson 1999, 229–242.[10])Philonous begins his ﬁrst argument by contending that sensible qualitiessuch as heat are not distinct from pleasure or pain. Pleasure and pain,Philonous argues, are allowed by all to be merely in the mind; thereforethe same must be true for the sensible qualities. The most seriousdifﬁculties with this argument are (1) whether we should grant the “nodistinction” premise in the case of the particular sensory qualities invokedby Berkeley (why not suppose that I can distinguish between the heat andthe pain?) and (2) if we do, whether we should generalize to all sensoryqualities as Berkeley would have us do.Secondly, Philonous invokes relativity arguments to suggest that becausesensory qualities are relative to the perceiver, e.g. what is hot to one handmay be cold to the other and what is sweet to one person may be bitter toanother, they cannot belong to mind-independent material objects, for suchobjects could not bear contradictory qualities.As Berkeley is well aware, one may reply to this sort of argument byclaiming that only one of the incompatible qualities is truly a quality of theobject and that the other apparent qualities result from misperception. ButLisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 13
how then, Berkeley asks, are these “true” qualities to be identiﬁed anddistinguished from the “false” ones (3D 184)? By noting the differencesbetween animal perception and human perception, Berkeley suggests thatit would be arbitrary anthropocentrism to claim that humans have specialaccess to the true qualities of objects. Further, Berkeley uses the exampleof microscopes to undermine the prima facie plausible thought that thetrue visual qualities of objects are revealed by close examination. Thus,Berkeley provides a strong challenge to any direct realist attempt tospecify standard conditions under which the true (mind-independent)qualities of objects are (directly) perceived by sense.Under this pressure from Philonous, Hylas retreats (perhaps a bit quickly)from naïve realism to a more “philosophical” position. He ﬁrst tries tomake use of the primary/secondary quality distinction associated withmechanism and, again, locatable in the thought of Descartes and Locke.Thus, Hylas allows that color, taste, etc. may be mind-dependent(secondary) qualities, but contends that ﬁgure, solidity, motion and rest(the primary qualities) exist in mind-independent material bodies. Themechanist picture behind this proposal is that bodies are composed ofparticles with size, shape, motion/rest, and perhaps solidity, and that oursensory ideas arise from the action of such particles on our sense organsand, ultimately, on our minds. Berkeley opposes this sort of mechanismthroughout his writings, believing that it engenders skepticism by dictatingthat bodies are utterly unlike our sensory experience of them. HerePhilonous has a two-pronged reply: (1) The same sorts of relativityarguments that were made against secondary qualities can be made againstprimary ones. (2) We cannot abstract the primary qualities (e.g. shape)from secondary ones (e.g. color), and thus we cannot conceive ofmechanist material bodies which are extended but not (in themselves)colored.[11]George Berkeley
14 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
When, after some further struggles, Hylas ﬁnally capitulates to Philonous’view that all of existence is mind-dependent, he does so unhappily andwith great reluctance. Philonous needs to convince him (as Berkeleyneeded to convince his readers in both books) that a commonsensicalphilosophy could be built on an immaterialist foundation, that no one but askeptic or atheist would ever miss matter. As a matter of historical fact,Berkeley persuaded few of his contemporaries, who for the most partregarded him as a purveyor of skeptical paradoxes (Bracken 1965).Nevertheless, we can and should appreciate the way in which Berkeleyarticulated a positive idealist philosophical system, which, if not in perfectaccord with common sense, is in many respects superior to its competitors.3. Berkeley’s positive program: idealism andcommon sense3.1 The basics of Berkeley’s ontology3.1.1 The status of ordinary objectsThe basics of Berkeley’s metaphysics are apparent from the ﬁrst section ofthe main body of the Principles:It is evident to any one who takes a survey of the objects of humanknowledge, that they are either ideas actually imprinted on thesenses, or else such as are perceived by attending to the passionsand operations of the mind, or lastly ideas formed by help ofmemory and imagination, either compounding, dividing, or barelyrepresenting those originally perceived in the aforesaid ways. Bysight I have the ideas of light and colours with their several degreesand variations. By touch I perceive, for example, hard and soft,heat and cold, motion and resistance, and of all these more and lessLisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 15
As this passage illustrates, Berkeley does not deny the existence ofordinary objects such as stones, trees, books, and apples. On the contrary,as was indicated above, he holds that only an immaterialist account ofsuch objects can avoid skepticism about their existence and nature. Whatsuch objects turn out to be, on his account, are bundles or collections ofideas. An apple is a combination of visual ideas (including the sensiblequalities of color and visual shape), tangible ideas, ideas of taste, smell,etc.[12] The question of what does the combining is a philosophicallyinteresting one which Berkeley does not address in detail. He does makeclear that there are two sides to the process of bundling ideas into objects:(1) co-occurrence, an objective fact about what sorts of ideas tend toaccompany each other in our experience, and (2) something we do whenwe decide to single out a set of co-occurring ideas and refer to it with acertain name (NTV 109).Thus, although there is no material world for Berkeley, there is a physicalworld, a world of ordinary objects. This world is mind-dependent, for it iscomposed of ideas, whose existence consists in being perceived. For ideas,and so for the physical world, esse est percipi.either as to quantity or degree. Smelling furnishes me with odours;the palate with tastes, and hearing conveys sounds to the mind inall their variety of tone and composition. And as several of theseare observed to accompany each other, they come to be marked byone name, and so to be reputed as one thing. Thus, for example, acertain colour, taste, smell, ﬁgure and consistence having beenobserved to go together, are accounted one distinct thing, signiﬁedby the name apple. Other collections of ideas constitute a stone, atree, a book, and the like sensible things; which, as they arepleasing or disagreeable, excite the passions of love, hatred, joy,grief, and so forth.George Berkeley
16 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
3.1.2 Spirits as active substancesBerkeley’s ontology is not exhausted by the ideal, however. In addition toperceived things (ideas), he posits perceivers, i.e., minds or spirits, as heoften terms them. Spirits, he emphasizes, are totally different in kind fromideas, for they are active where ideas are passive. This suggests thatBerkeley has replaced one kind of dualism, of mind and matter, withanother kind of dualism, of mind and idea. There is something to thispoint, given Berkeley’s refusal to elaborate upon the relation betweenactive minds and passive ideas. At Principles 49, he famously dismissesquibbling about how ideas inhere in the mind (are minds colored andextended when such sensible qualities “exist in” them?) with thedeclaration that “those qualities are in the mind only as they are perceivedby it, that is, not by way of mode or attribute, but only by way of idea”.Berkeley’s dualism, however, is a dualism within the realm of the mind-dependent.3.1.3 God’s existenceThe last major item in Berkeley’s ontology is God, himself a spirit, but aninﬁnite one. Berkeley believes that once he has established idealism, hehas a novel and convincing argument for God’s existence as the cause ofour sensory ideas. He argues by elimination: What could cause my sensoryideas? Candidate causes, supposing that Berkeley has already establishedthat matter doesn’t exist, are (1) other ideas, (2) myself, or (3) some otherspirit. Berkeley eliminates the ﬁrst option with the following argument(PHK 25):(1) Ideas are manifestly passive—no power or activity is perceivedin them.Lisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 17
It should be noted that premise (2) is rather strong; Phillip Cummins(1990) identiﬁes it as Berkeley’s “manifest qualities thesis” and arguesthat it commits Berkeley to the view that ideas are radically andcompletely dependent on perceivers in the way that sensations of pleasureand pain are typically taken to be.[13]The second option is eliminated with the observation that although Iclearly can cause some ideas at will (e.g. ideas of imagination), sensoryideas are involuntary; they present themselves whether I wish to perceivethem or not and I cannot control their content. The hidden assumption hereis that any causing the mind does must be done by willing and suchwilling must be accessible to consciousness. Berkeley is hardly alone inpresupposing this model of the mental; Descartes, for example, makes asimilar set of assumptions.This leaves us, then, with the third option: my sensory ideas must becaused by some other spirit. Berkeley thinks that when we consider thestunning complexity and systematicity of our sensory ideas, we mustconclude that the spirit in question is wise and benevolent beyondmeasure, that, in short, he is God.3.2 Replies to objectionsWith the basic ingredients of Berkeley’s ontology in place, we can beginto consider how his system works by seeing how he responds to a numberof intuitively compelling objections to it. Berkeley himself sees very well(2) But because of the mind-dependent status of ideas, they cannothave any characteristics which they are not perceived to have.Therefore,(3) Ideas are passive, that is, they possess no causal power.George Berkeley
18 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
how necessary this is: Much of the Principles is structured as a series ofobjections and replies, and in the Three Dialogues, once Philonous hasrendered Hylas a reluctant convert to idealism, he devotes the rest of thebook to convincing him that this is a philosophy which coheres well withcommon sense, at least better than materialism ever did.3.2.1 Real things vs. imaginary onesPerhaps the most obvious objection to idealism is that it makes real thingsno different from imaginary ones—both seem ﬂeeting ﬁgments of our ownminds, rather than the solid objects of the materialists. Berkeley repliesthat the distinction between real things and chimeras retains its full forceon his view. One way of making the distinction is suggested by hisargument for the existence of God, examined above: Ideas which dependon our own ﬁnite human wills are not (constituents of) real things. Notbeing voluntary is thus a necessary condition for being a real thing, but itis clearly not sufﬁcient, since hallucinations and dreams do not depend onour wills, but are nevertheless not real. Berkeley notes that the ideas thatconstitute real things exhibit a steadiness, vivacity, and distinctness thatchimerical ideas do not. The most crucial feature that he points to,however, is order. The ideas imprinted by the author of nature as part ofrerum natura occur in regular patterns, according to the laws of nature(“the set rules or established methods, wherein the mind we depend onexcites in us the ideas of sense, are called the Laws of Nature” PHK 30).They are thus regular and coherent, that is, they constitute a coherent realworld.Lisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 19
3.2.2 Hidden structures and internal mechanismsThe related notions of regularity and of the laws of nature are central tothe workability of Berkeley’s idealism. They allow him to respond to thefollowing objection, put forward in PHK 60:
Berkeley’s answer, for which he is indebted to Malebranche,[14] is that,although God could make a watch run (that is, produce in us ideas of awatch running) without the watch having any internal mechanism (that is,without it being the case that, were we to open the watch, we would haveideas of an internal mechanism), he cannot do so if he is to act inaccordance with the laws of nature, which he has established for ourbeneﬁt, to make the world regular and predictable. Thus, whenever we…it will be demanded to what purpose serves that curiousorganization of plants, and the admirable mechanism in the parts ofanimals; might not vegetables grow, and shoot forth leaves andblossoms, and animals perform all their motions, as well without aswith all that variety of internal parts so elegantly contrived and puttogether, which being ideas have nothing powerful or operative inthem, nor have any necessary connexion with the effects ascribedto them? […] And how comes it to pass, that whenever there is anyfault in the going of a watch, there is some corresponding disorderto be found in the movements, which being mended by a skilfulhand, all is right again? The like may be said of all the clockworkof Nature, great part whereof is so wonderfully ﬁne and subtle, asscarce to be discerned by the best microscope. In short, it will beasked, how upon our principles any tolerable account can be given,or any ﬁnal cause assigned of an innumerable multitude of bodiesand machines framed with the most exquisite art, which in thecommon philosophy have very apposite uses assigned them, andserve to explain abundance of phenomena.George Berkeley
20 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
have ideas of a working watch, we will ﬁnd that if we open it,[15] we willsee (have ideas of) an appropriate internal mechanism. Likewise, when wehave ideas of a living tulip, we will ﬁnd that if we pull it apart, we willobserve the usual internal structure of such plants, with the same transporttissues, reproductive parts, etc.3.2.3 Scientiﬁc explanationImplicit in the answer above is Berkeley’s insightful account of scientiﬁcexplanation and the aims of science. A bit of background is needed here tosee why this issue posed a special challenge for Berkeley. One traditionalunderstanding of science, derived from Aristotle, held that it aims atidentifying the causes of things. Modern natural philosophers such asDescartes narrowed science’s domain to efﬁcient causes and thus held thatscience should reveal the efﬁcient causes of natural things, processes, andevents.[16] Berkeley considers this as the source of an objection atPrinciples 51:
On Berkeley’s account, the true cause of any phenomenon is a spirit, andmost often it is the same spirit, namely, God.But surely, one might object, it is a step backwards to abandon ourscientiﬁc theories and simply note that God causes what happens in thephysical world! Berkeley’s ﬁrst response here, that we should think withSeventhly, it will upon this be demanded whether it does not seemabsurd to take away natural causes, and ascribe every thing to theimmediate operation of spirits? We must no longer say upon theseprinciples that ﬁre heats, or water cools, but that a spirit heats, andso forth. Would not a man be deservedly laughed at, who shouldtalk after this manner? I answer, he would so; in such things weought to think with the learned, and speak with the vulgar.Lisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 21
the learned but speak with the vulgar, advises us to continue to say that ﬁreheats, that the heart pumps blood, etc. What makes this advice legitimateis that he can reconstrue such talk as being about regularities in our ideas.In Berkeley’s view, the point of scientiﬁc inquiry is to reveal suchregularities:
Natural philosophers thus consider signs, rather than causes (PHK 108),but their results are just as useful as they would be under a materialistsystem. Moreover, the regularities they discover provide the sort ofexplanation proper to science, by rendering the particular events theysubsume unsurprising (PHK 104). The sort of explanation proper toscience, then, is not causal explanation, but reduction to regularity.[17]If therefore we consider the difference there is betwixt naturalphilosophers and other men, with regard to their knowledge of thephenomena, we shall ﬁnd it consists, not in an exacter knowledgeof the efﬁcient cause that produces them, for that can be no otherthan the will of a spirit, but only in a greater largeness ofcomprehension, whereby analogies, harmonies, and agreements arediscovered in the works of Nature, and the particular effectsexplained, that is, reduced to general rules, see Sect. 62, whichrules grounded on the analogy, and uniformness observed in theproduction of natural effects, are most agreeable, and sought afterby the mind; for that they extend our prospect beyond what ispresent, and near to us, and enable us to make very probableconjectures, touching things that may have happened at very greatdistances of time and place, as well as to predict things to come….(PHK 105)George Berkeley
22 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
3.2.4 Unperceived objects—Principles vs. DialoguesRegularity provides a foundation for one of Berkeley’s responses to theobjection summarized in the famous limerick:
The worry, of course, is that if to be is to be perceived (for non-spirits),then there are no trees in the Quad at 3 a.m. when no one is there toperceive them and there is no furniture in my ofﬁce when I leave and closethe door. Interestingly, in the Principles Berkeley seems relativelyunperturbed by this natural objection to idealism. He claims that there isno problem for
So, when I say that my desk still exists after I leave my ofﬁce, perhaps Ijust mean that I would perceive it if I were in my ofﬁce, or, more broadly,that a ﬁnite mind would perceive the desk were it in the appropriatecircumstances (in my ofﬁce, with the lights on, with eyes open, etc.). Thisis to provide a sort of counterfactual analysis of the continued existence ofunperceived objects. The truth of the counterfactuals in question isanchored in regularity: because God follows set patterns in the way hecauses ideas, I would have a desk idea if I were in the ofﬁce.There was a young man who said God, must think it exceedingly odd if he ﬁnds that the tree continues to bewhen no one’s about in the Quad.[18]
…anyone that shall attend to what is meant by the term exist whenapplied to sensible things. The table I write on, I say, exists, that is,I see and feel it; and if I were out of my study I should say itexisted, meaning thereby that if I was in my study I might perceiveit, or that some other spirit actually does perceive it. (PHK 3)Lisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 23
Unfortunately, this analysis has counterintuitive consequences whencoupled with the esse est percipi doctrine (McCracken 1979, 286). If to beis, as Berkeley insists, to be perceived, then the unperceived desk does notexist, despite the fact that it would be perceived and thus would exist ifsomeone opened the ofﬁce door. Consequently, on this view the deskwould not endure uninterrupted but would pop in and out of existence,though it would do so quite predictably. One way to respond to this worrywould be to dismiss it—what does it matter if the desk ceases to existwhen unperceived, as long as it exists whenever we need it? Berkeleyshows signs of this sort of attitude in Principles 45–46, where he tries toargue that his materialist opponents and scholastic predecessors are inmuch the same boat.[19] This “who cares?” response to the problem ofcontinued existence is fair enough as far as it goes, but it surely doesconﬂict with common sense, so if Berkeley were to take this route hewould have to moderate his claims about his system’s ability toaccommodate everything desired by the person on the street.Another strategy, however, is suggested by Berkeley’s reference in PHK 3and 48 to “some other spirit,” a strategy summarized in a further limerick:
If the other spirit in question is God, an omnipresent being, then perhapshis perception can be used to guarantee a completely continuous existenceto every physical object. In the Three Dialogues, Berkeley very clearlyinvokes God in this context. Interestingly, whereas in the Principles, as wehave seen above, he argued that God must exist in order to cause our ideasof sense, in the Dialogues (212, 214–5) he argues that our ideas must existDear Sir, your astonishment’s odd I am always about in the Quad And that’s why the tree continues to be since observed by, Yours faithfully, GodGeorge Berkeley
24 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
in God when not perceived by us.[20] If our ideas exist in God, then theypresumably exist continuously. Indeed, they must exist continuously, sincestandard Christian doctrine dictates that God is unchanging.Although this solves one problem for Berkeley, it creates several more.The ﬁrst is that Berkeley’s other commitments, religious andphilosophical, dictate that God cannot literally have our ideas. Our ideasare sensory ideas and God is a being who “can suffer nothing, nor beaffected with any painful sensation, or indeed any sensation at all” (3D206). Nor can our sensory ideas be copies of God’s nonsensory ones(McCracken 1979):A second problem is that God’s ideas are eternal, whereas physical objectstypically have ﬁnite duration. And, even worse, God has ideas of allpossible objects (Pitcher 1977, 171–2), not just the ones which we wouldcommonsensically wish to say exist.A solution (proposed by McCracken) to these related problems is to tie thecontinued existence of ordinary objects to God’s will, rather than to hisunderstanding. McCracken’s suggestion is that unperceived objectscontinue to exist as God’s decrees. Such an account in terms of divinedecrees or volitions looks promising: The tree continues to exist whenunperceived just in case God has an appropriate volition or intention tocause a tree-idea in ﬁnite perceivers under the right circumstances.Furthermore, this solution has important textual support: In the ThreeDialogues, Hylas challenges Philonous to account for the creation, giventhat all existence is mind-dependent, in his view, but everything must existeternally in the mind of God. Philonous responds as follows:How can that which is sensible be like that which is insensible?Can a real thing in itself invisible be like a colour; or a real thingwhich is not audible, be like a sound? (3D 206)Lisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 25
Here Berkeley ties the actual existence of created physical beings to God’sdecrees, that is, to his will.As with the counterfactual analysis of continued existence, however, thisaccount also fails under pressure from the esse est percipi principle:
Thus, if the only grounds of continued existence are volitions in God’smind, rather than perceived items (ideas), then ordinary objects do notexist continuously, but rather pop in and out of existence in a lawfulfashion.Fortunately, Kenneth Winkler has put forward an interpretation whichgoes a great distance towards resolving this difﬁculty. In effect, heproposes that we amend the “volitional” interpretation of the existence ofobjects with the hypothesis that Berkeley held “the denial of blind agency”(Winkler 1989, 207–224). This principle, which can be found in manyauthors of the period (including Locke), dictates that any volition musthave an idea behind it, that is, must have a cognitive component that givesMay we not understand it [the creation] to have been entirely inrespect of ﬁnite spirits; so that things, with regard to us, mayproperly be said to begin their existence, or be created, when Goddecreed they should become perceptible to intelligent creatures, inthat order and manner which he then established, and we now callthe laws of Nature? You may call this a relative, or hypotheticalexistence if you please. (3D 253)
Hylas. Yes, Philonous, I grant the existence of a sensible thingconsists in being perceivable, but not in being actually perceived.Philonous. And what is perceivable but an idea? And can an ideaexist without being actually perceived? These are points long sinceagreed between us. (3D 234)George Berkeley
26 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
content to the volition, which would otherwise be empty or “blind”. Whilethe principle is never explicitly invoked or argued for by Berkeley, in anumber of passages he does note the interdependence of will andunderstanding. Winkler plausibly suggests that Berkeley may have foundthis principle so obvious as to need no arguing. With it in place, we have aguarantee that anything willed by God, e.g. that ﬁnite perceivers inappropriate circumstances should have elm tree ideas, also has a divineidea associated with it. Furthermore, we have a neat explanation ofBerkeley’s above-noted leap in the Dialogues from the claim that Godmust cause our ideas to the claim that our ideas must exist in God.Of course, it remains true that God cannot have ideas that are, strictlyspeaking, the same as ours. This problem is closely related to another thatconfronts Berkeley: Can two people ever perceive the same thing?Common sense demands that two students can perceive the same tree, butBerkeley’s metaphysics seems to dictate that they never truly perceive thesame thing, since they each have their own numerically distinct ideas. Oneway to dissolve this difﬁculty is to recall that objects are bundles of ideas.Although two people cannot perceive/have the numerically same idea,they can perceive the same object, assuming that perceiving a componentof the bundle sufﬁces for perception of the bundle.[21] Another proposal(Baxter 1991) is to invoke Berkeley’s doctrine that “same” has both aphilosophical and a vulgar sense (3D 247) in order to declare that my tree-idea and your tree-idea are strictly distinct but loosely (vulgarly) the same.Either account might be applied in order to show either that God and Imay perceive the same object, or that God and I may perceive, looselyspeaking, the same thing.From this discussion we may draw a criterion for the actual existence ofordinary objects, one which summarizes Berkeley’s considered views:An X exists at time t if and only if God has an idea thatLisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 27
This captures the idea that existence depends on God’s perceptions, butonly on the perceptions which correspond to or are included in hisvolitions about what we should perceive. It also captures the fact that thebundling of ideas into objects is done by us.[22]3.2.5 The possibility of errorA further worry about Berkeley’s system arises from the idea-bundleaccount of objects.[23] If there is no mind-independent object againstwhich to measure my ideas, but rather my ideas help to constitute theobject, then how can my ideas ever fail—how is error possible? Here isanother way to raise the worry that I have in mind: We saw above thatBerkeley’s arguments against commonsense realism in the ﬁrst Dialogueattempt to undermine (1) claims that heat, odor, taste are distinguishablefrom pleasure/pain and (2) the claim that objects have one true color, onetrue shape, one true taste, etc. If we then consider what this implies aboutBerkeleyian objects, we must conclude that Berkeley’s cherry is red,purple, gray, tart, sweet, small, large, pleasant, and painful! It seems thatBerkeley’s desire to refute the mechanist representationalism whichdictates that objects are utterly unlike our experience of them has lead himto push beyond common sense to the view that objects are exactly like ourexperience of them.[24] There is no denying that Berkeley is out of syncwith common sense here. He does, however, have an account of error, ashe shows us in the Dialogues:corresponds to a volition that if a ﬁnite mind at t is in appropriatecircumstances (e.g. in a particular place, looking in the rightdirection, or looking through a microscope), then it will have anidea that we would be disposed to call a perception of an X.
Hylas. What say you to this? Since, according to you, men judge ofthe reality of things by their senses, how can a man be mistaken inGeorge Berkeley
28 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Extrapolating from this, we may say that my gray idea of the cherry,formed in dim light, is not in itself wrong and forms a part of the bundle-object just as much as your red idea, formed in daylight. However, if Ijudge that the cherry would look gray in bright light, I’m in error.Furthermore, following Berkeley’s directive to speak with the vulgar, Iought not to say (in ordinary circumstances) that “the cherry is gray,”since that will be taken to imply that the cherry would look gray tohumans in daylight.3.2.6 Spirits and causationWe have spent some time examining the difﬁculties Berkeley faces in the“idea/ordinary object” half of his ontology. Arguably, however, lesstractable difﬁculties confront him in the realm of spirits. Early on,Berkeley attempts to forestall materialist skeptics who object that we haveno idea of spirit by arguing for this position himself:thinking the moon a plain lucid surface, about a foot in diameter;or a square tower, seen at a distance, round; or an oar, with one endin the water, crooked?Philonous. He is not mistaken with regard to the ideas he actuallyperceives; but in the inferences he makes from his presentperceptions. Thus in the case of the oar, what he immediatelyperceives by sight is certainly crooked; and so far he is in the right.But if he thence conclude, that upon taking the oar out of the waterhe shall perceive the same crookedness; or that it would affect histouch, as crooked things are wont to do: in that he is mistaken. (3D238)
A spirit is one simple, undivided, active being: as it perceivesideas, it is called the understanding, and as it produces orLisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 29
Surely the materialist will be tempted to complain, however, thatBerkeley’s unperceivable spiritual substances, lurking behind the scenesand supporting that which we can perceive, sound a lot like the materialsubstances which he so emphatically rejects.Two very different responses are available to Berkeley on this issue, eachof which he seems to have made at a different point in his philosophicaldevelopment. One response would be to reject spiritual substance just ashe rejected material substance. Spirits, then, might be understood in aHumean way, as bundles of ideas and volitions. Fascinatingly, somethinglike this view is considered by Berkeley in his early philosophicalnotebooks (see PC 577ff). Why he abandons it is an interesting anddifﬁcult question;[25] it seems that one worry he has is how theunderstanding and the will are to be integrated and rendered one thing.The second response would be to explain why spiritual substances arebetter posits than material ones. To this end, Berkeley emphasizes that wehave a notion of spirit, which is just to say that we know what the wordmeans. This purportedly contrasts with “matter,” which Berkeley thinkshas no determinate content. Of course, the real question is: How does theterm “spirit” come by any content, given that we have no idea of it? In thePrinciples, Berkeley declares only that we know spirit through our ownotherwise operates about them, it is called the will. Hence there canbe no idea formed of a soul or spirit: for all ideas whatever, beingpassive and inert, vide Sect. 25, they cannot represent unto us, byway of image or likeness, that which acts. A little attention willmake it plain to any one, that to have an idea which shall be likethat active principle of motion and change of ideas, is absolutelyimpossible. Such is the nature of spirit or that which acts, that itcannot be of it self perceived, but only by the effects which itproduceth. (PHK 27)George Berkeley
30 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
case and that the content we assign to “spirit” is derived from the contenteach of us assigns to “I” (PHK 139–140). In the Dialogues, however,Berkeley shows a better appreciation of the force of the problem thatconfronts him:
To the main point of Hylas’ attack, Philonous replies that each of us has, inour own case, an immediate intuition of ourselves, that is, we know ourown minds through reﬂection (3D 231–233). Berkeley’s consideredposition, that we gain access to ourselves as thinking things throughconscious awareness, is surely an intuitive one. Nevertheless, it isdisappointing that he never gave an explicit response to the Humeanchallenge he entertained in his notebooks:A closely related problem which confronts Berkeley is how to make senseof the causal powers that he ascribes to spirits. Here again, the notebookssuggest a surprisingly Humean view:[Hylas.] You say your own soul supplies you with some sort of anidea or image of God. But at the same time you acknowledge youhave, properly speaking, no idea of your own soul. You evenafﬁrm that spirits are a sort of beings altogether different fromideas. Consequently that no idea can be like a spirit. We havetherefore no idea of any spirit. You admit nevertheless that there isspiritual substance, although you have no idea of it; while youdeny there can be such a thing as material substance, because youhave no notion or idea of it. Is this fair dealing? To act consistently,you must either admit matter or reject spirit. (3D 232)
+   Mind is a congeries of Perceptions. Take away Perceptions &you take away the Mind put the Perceptions & you put the mind.(PC 580)+   The simple idea call’d Power seems obscure or rather none atLisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 31
461 suggests the Humean view that a cause is whatever is (regularly)[27]followed by an effect. 499 and 699 revise this doctrine by requiring that acause not only (regularly) precede an effect but also be a volition.Berkeley’s talk of occasion here reveals the immediate inﬂuence ofMalebranche. Malebranche held that the only true cause is God and thatapparent ﬁnite causes are only “occasional causes,” which is to say thatthey provide occasions for God to act on his general volitional policies.Occasional “causes” thus regularly precede their “effects” but are not trulyresponsible for producing them. In these notebook entries, however,Berkeley seems to be suggesting that all there is to causality is this regularconsequence, with the ﬁrst item being a volition. Such an account, unlikeMalebranche’s, would make my will and God’s will causes in exactly thesame thin sense.all. but onely the relation ‘twixt cause & Effect. Wn I ask whetherA can move B. if A be an intelligent thing. I mean no more thanwhether the volition of A that B move be attended with the motionof B, if A be senseless whether the impulse of A against B befollow’d by ye motion of B.       461[26]S   What means Cause as distinguish’d from Occasion? nothing buta Being wch wills wn the Effect follows the volition. Those thingsthat happen from without we are not the Cause of therefore there issome other Cause of them i.e., there is a being that wills theseperceptions in us.       499S   There is a difference betwixt Power & V olition. There may bevolition without Power. But there can be no Power withoutV olition. Power implyeth volition & at the same time aConnotation of the Effects following the V olition.       699George Berkeley
32 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Some commentators, most notably Winkler, suppose that Berkeley retainsthis view of causality in the published works. The main difﬁculty with thisinterpretation is that Berkeley more than once purports to inspect our ideaof body, and the sensory qualities included therein, and to conclude fromthat inspection that bodies are passive (DM 22, PHK 25). This procedurewould make little sense if bodies, according to Berkeley, fail to be causesby deﬁnition, simply because they are not minds with wills.[28] What isneeded is an explanation of what Berkeley means by activity, which heclearly equates with causal power. Winkler (1989, 130–1) supplies such anaccount, according to which activity means direction towards an end. Butthis is to identify efﬁcient causation with ﬁnal causation, a controversialmove at best which Berkeley would be making without comment orargument.The alternative would be to suppose, as De Motu 33 suggests, thatBerkeley holds that we gain a notion of activity, along with a notion ofspirit as substance, through reﬂective awareness/internal consciousness:On this interpretation, Berkeley would again have abandoned the radicalHumean position entertained in his notebooks, as he clearly did on thequestion of the nature of spirit. One can only speculate as to whether hisreasons would have been primarily philosophical, theological, or practical.Berkeley’s writings, however, are not generally characterized by deferenceto authority, quite the contrary,[29] as he himself proclaims:[W]e feel it [mind] as a faculty of altering both our own state andthat of other things, and that is properly called vital, and puts awide distinction between soul and bodies. (DM 33)
… one thing, I know, I am not guilty of. I do not pin my faith onthe sleeve of any great man. I act not out of prejudice &prepossession. I do not adhere to any opinion because it is an oldLisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 33
BibliographyBerkeley’s WorksThe standard edition of Berkeley’s works is:Berkeley, G. (1948–1957). The Works of George Berkeley, Bishop ofCloyne. A.A. Luce and T.E. Jessop (eds.). London: Thomas Nelsonand Sons. 9 vols.The following abbreviations are used to reference Berkeley’s works:PC“Philosophical Commentaries”Works 1:9–104NTVAn Essay Towards a New Theory of VisionWorks 1:171–239PHKOf the Principles of Human Knowledge: Part 1Works 2:41–1133DThree Dialogues between Hylas and PhilonousWorks 2:163–263DMDe Motu, or The Principle and Nature of Motionand the Cause of the Communication of Motions,trans. A.A. LuceWorks 4:31–52References to these works are by section numbers (or entry numbers, forPC), except for 3D, where they are by page number.Other useful editions include:Berkeley, G. (1944). Philosophical commentaries, generally called theCommonplace book [of] George Berkeley, bishop of Cloyne. A.A.Luce (ed.). London: Thomas Nelson and Sons.Berkeley, G. (1975). Philosophical Works; Including the Works on Vision.M. Ayers (ed.). London: Dent.one, a receiv’d one, a fashionable one, or one that I have spentmuch time in the study and cultivation of. (PC 465)George Berkeley
34 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Berkeley, G. (1987). George Berkeley’ s Manuscript Introduction. B.Belfrage (ed.). Oxford: Doxa.Berkeley, G. (1992). De Motu and The Analyst: A Modern Edition withIntroductions and Commentary. D. Jesseph (trans. and ed.).Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.A collection, useful to students, of primary texts constituting backgroundto Berkeley or early critical reactions to Berkeley:McCracken, C. J. and I. C. Tipton (eds.), (2000). Berkeley’ s Principles andDialogues: Background Source Materials, Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.Bibliographical studiesJessop, T. E. (1973). A bibliography of George Berkeley, by T.E. Jessop.With inventory of Berkeley’ s manuscript remains, by A.A. Luce. TheHague: M. Nijhoff.Turbayne, C., Ed. (1982). Berkeley: Critical and Interpretive Essays.Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. [Contains abibliography of George Berkeley 1963–1979.]References citedAtherton, M. (1987). “Berkeley’s Anti-Abstractionism.” In Essays on thePhilosophy of George Berkeley. E. Sosa (ed.). Dordrecht: D. Reidel,85–102.Atherton, M. (1990). Berkeley’ s Revolution in Vision. Ithaca: CornellUniversity Press.Atherton, M., Ed. (1994). Women Philosophers of the Early ModernPeriod. Indianapolis: Hackett.Atherton, M. (1995). “Berkeley Without God.” In Berkeley’ s Metaphysics:Lisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 35
Structural, Interpretive, and Critical Essays. R. G. Muehlmann (ed.).University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 231–248.Bennett, J. (1971). Locke, Berkeley, Hume: Central Themes. Oxford:Clarendon Press.Bolton, M. B. (1987). “Berkeley’s Objection to Abstract Ideas andUnconceived Objects.” In Essays on the Philosophy of GeorgeBerkeley. E. Sosa (ed.). Dordrecht: D. Reidel.Bracken, H. M. (1965). The Early Reception of Berkeley’ s Immaterialism1710–1733. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.Campbell, J. (2002). “Berkeley’s Puzzle.” In Conceivability andPossibility. T. S. Gendler and J. Hawthorne (eds.). Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press, 127–143.Chappell, V . (1994). “Locke’s theory of ideas.” In The CambridgeCompanion to Locke. V . Chappell (ed.). Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press, 26–55.Cummins, P. (1990). “Berkeley’s Manifest Qualities Thesis.” Journal ofthe History of Philosophy, 28: 385–401.Downing, L. (2005). “Berkeley’s Natural Philosophy and Philosophy ofScience.” In The Cambridge Companion to Berkeley. K. P. Winkler(ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Fleming, N. (1985). “The Tree in the Quad.” American PhilosophicalQuarterly, 22: 22–36.Gallois, A. (1974). “Berkeley’s Master Argument.” The PhilosophicalReview, 83: 55–69.Jesseph, D. (1993). Berkeley’ s Philosophy of Mathematics. Chicago:University of Chicago Press.Lennon, T. M. (1988). “Berkeley and the Ineffable.” Synthese, 75: 231–250.Locke, J. (1975). An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Oxford:Clarendon Press.Luce, A. A. (1963). The Dialectic of Immaterialism. London: Hodder &George Berkeley
36 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Stoughten.Malebranche, N. (1980). The Search After Truth. Columbus: The OhioState University Press.McCracken, C. (1979). “What Does Berkeley’s God See in the Quad?”Archiv fur Geschichte der Philosophie, 61: 280–92.McCracken, C. J. (1995). “Godless Immaterialism: On Atherton’sBerkeley.” In Berkeley’ s Metaphysics: Structural, Interpretive, andCritical Essays. R. G. Muehlmann (ed.). University Park:Pennsylvania State University Press, 249–260.McKim, R. (1997–8). “Abstraction and Immaterialism: RecentInterpretations.” Berkeley Newsletter, 15: 1–13.Muehlmann, R. G. (1992). Berkeley’ s Ontology. Indianapolis: Hackett.Nadler, S. (1998). “Doctrines of Explanation in Late Scholasticism and inthe Mechanical Philosophy.” In The Cambridge History ofSeventeenth-Century Philosophy (V olume 1). D. Garber and M. Ayers(eds.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 513–552.Pappas, G. S. (2000). Berkeley’ s Thought. Ithaca: Cornell UniversityPress.Pitcher, G. (1977). Berkeley. London: Routledge.Saidel, E. (1993). “Making Sense of Berkeley’s Challenge.” History ofPhilosophy Quarterly, 10 (4): 325–339.Tipton, I. C. (1974). Berkeley: The Philosophy of Immaterialism. London:Methuen & Co Ltd.Wilson, M. D. (1999). Ideas and mechanism: essays on early modernphilosophy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.Winkler, K. P. (1989). Berkeley: An Interpretation. Oxford: ClarendonPress.Winkler, K. P. (2005). The Cambridge Companion to Berkeley.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Yolton, J. W. (1984). Perceptual Acquaintance from Descartes to Reid.Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.Lisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 37
Additional Selected Secondary LiteratureBerman, D. (1994). George Berkeley: Idealism and the Man. Oxford:Clarendon Press.Bettcher, Talia Mae (2007). Berkeley’ s Philosophy of Spirit:Consciousness, Ontology and the Elusive Subject. London:Continuum.Creery, W. E., Ed. (1991). George Berkeley: Critical Assessments.London: Routledge. 3 vols.Daniel, Stephen H., Ed. (2007). Reexamining Berkeley’ s Philosophy.Toronto: University of Toronto Press.Fogelin, R. J. (2001). Berkeley and the Principles of Human Knowledge.London: Routledge.Foster, J. and H. Robinson, Eds. (1985). Essays on Berkeley: ATercentennial Celebration. Oxford: Clarendon Press.Roberts, John Russell (2007). A Metaphysics for the Mob. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.Stoneham, T. (2002). Berkeley’ s World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Urmson, J. O. (1982). Berkeley. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Academic Tools
How to cite this entry.
Preview the PDF version of this entry at the Friends of the SEPSociety.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry at the InternetPhilosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry a t  PhilPapers, with linksto its database.George Berkeley
38 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Other Internet ResourcesInternational Berkeley SocietyGeorge Berkeley, maintained by David R. Wilkins, School ofMathematics, Trinity College, Dublin (especially useful on theAnalyst controversy, but good general information also).Related EntriesDescartes, René |  Hume, David |  idealism |  Locke, John |  Malebranche,NicolasNotes to George Berkeley1. Berkeley also argues against abstractionism in Alciphron and A Defenseof Free-thinking in Mathematics (Berkeley 1948-1957, 3: 292-293, 331-335, 4: 134-5). See also the First draft of The Introduction to thePrinciples, which differs in important ways from the published version(Berkeley 1948-57, 2: 121-145).2. Interpreters have usefully distinguished several different types ofabstract ideas attacked by Berkeley. See Pappas 2000, 40-44.3. The question of what exactly Berkeley's argument against abstraction is,and what role it plays in supporting his immaterialism, is a disputed one.Winkler (1989, 30-35) and Jesseph (1993, 20-33) maintain that Berkeley'smain argument against abstraction is the argument from impossibility,according to which abstract ideas are impossible because they would beideas of impossible objects. Such an argument could only play asupporting role in the attack on materialism. Others (including Pappas2000, Bolton 1987, Atherton 1987, Muehlmann 1992) interpret theargument differently and assign a more central role to it. McKim 1997-8Lisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 39
provides a critical review of several relatively recent positions on theissue.4. More speciﬁcally, she inquired as to “how the soul of man (since it isbut a thinking substance) can determine the spirits of the body to producevoluntary actions” (Atherton 1994, 11).5. The origin of the label is Gallois 1974.6. Analogously, I can conceive of something not thought of by me rightnow, even if in order to do so I must employ a representation that isconceived of by me right now. If Berkeley denies this, he ends up asolipsist and a presentist, not just an idealist, as is noted by manycommentators, e.g. Tipton 1974, 161.7. Campbell (2002, 128) attributes something like this point to Berkeley aswell.8. It presupposes representationalism because it assumes that we areimmediately confronted with mind-dependent ideas and then raises thequestion of whether we can use them to conceive of unconceived, mind-independent objects.9. Saidel 1993 provides a useful review and critique of somecontemporary approaches to the Master Argument.10. Another interesting and detailed account of the “identiﬁcationargument” and the “argument from perceptual relativity” is offered byMuehlmann 1992, chapter 5.11. More precisely, according to mechanism, bodies are not colored in theway we suppose them to be, based on our sensory ideas. One (Lockean)account of color is as a (mere) power to cause ideas in us. On that account,George Berkeley
40 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
bodies are in fact colored and they would be colored even in the absenceof perceivers.12. For an alternative, phenomenalist account of Berkeleyian objects, seeWinkler 1989, 191-203.13. Contra more realistic interpretations of Berkeley's ideas (sensibleobjects) proffered by Luce 1963 and Atherton 1990. On this topic see alsoAtherton 1995 and McCracken 1995.14. See The Search After Truth, Elucidation Fifteen (Malebranche 1980,657-668).15. Of course, “if we open it” also requires an idealistic gloss, whichwould presumably go something like this: “If we form a volition to openit, which is then followed by the having of series of ideas of our handsmoving, of the watch opening, etc.”.16. Of course, this isn't true of occasionalists such as Malebranche, whofaced the same problem as Berkeley. It should also be noted that manyofﬁcially rejected Descartes' stance that natural philosophy concerns onlyefﬁcient causation. Boyle, e.g., decreed that it should consider ﬁnal causes,thus allowing it to partner with natural theology. His own work, however,had the overwhelming effect of directing attention to mechanical,presumably efﬁcient, causes. Berkeley piously afﬁrms the relevance ofﬁnal causes to natural philosophy at PHK 107. For more on these issuessee Nadler 1998.17. For a more detailed and somewhat subtler account, see Downing,forthcoming.18. This oft-cited limerick and its companion (see below) can be found inFleming 1985.Lisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 41
19. His claims here are interesting and perceptive. He maintains that thematerialists must hold that the proper objects of the senses, e.g. light andcolors, pop in and out of existence. And he highlights, à la Malebranche,the scholastic doctrine that conservation amounts to continuous creation.In both cases, however, there are clear grounds for arguing that thedoctrine violates common sense less egregiously than an idealistintermittent existence.20. Jonathan Bennett (1971, 170) turned this fact into a subject ofscholarly controversy.21. A number of controversial issues lurk here. Does Berkeley hold thatordinary objects are mediately or immediately perceived? Does Berkeleyhold that all perception is immediate perception? A good guide here isGeorge Pappas (2000, 147-182), who argues that Berkeley does allow formediate perception, but that ordinary objects are typically immediatelyperceived.22. Though done on the basis of regularities established by God.23. Wilson 1999, 241 nicely raises a version of this worry.24. See Wilson 1999, 241, footnote 2, where she cites Nicholas Sturgeon'scomments to her as the source of this point.25. Berkeley explicitly afﬁrms that spirits are substances in the Principlesand Dialogues. Nevertheless, Robert Muehlmann (1992, ch. 6) has arguedthat Berkeley's true view remains the Humean “congeries” account,although he conceals it.26. Note that the marginal “+” sign that accompanies this entry is usuallytaken as Berkeley's indication that he has rejected or droppedconsideration of the point contained therein.George Berkeley
42 Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
27. The importance of regularity is not explicit in these entries, butWinkler (1989, 108-9) argues convincingly that Berkeley acknowledges it.28. Tipton (1974, 307) notes that this deﬁnition would be “suspiciouslyuseful” given Berkeley's purposes.29. Though he is happy to cite established authors when he agrees withthem, more especially in his later works.Copyright © 2021 by the author Lisa DowningLisa Downing
Fall 2021 Edition 43